
The tradition in my father's family was, that their ancestor came to
this country from Wales, and from near the mountain of Snowdon, the
highest in Great Britain. I noted once a case from Wales, in the law
reports, where a person of our name was either plaintiff or defendant;
and one of the same name was secretary to the Virginia Company. These
are the only instances in which I have met with the name in that
country. I have found it in our early records; but the first particular
information I have of any ancestor was of my grandfather, who lived
at the place in Chesterfield called Ozborne's, and owned the lands
afterwards the glebe of the parish. He had three sons; Thomas who died
young, Field who settled on the waters of Roanoke and left numerous
descendants, and Peter, my father, who settled on the lands I still
own, called Shadwell, adjoining my present residence. He was born
February 29, 1707-8, and intermarried 1739, with Jane Randolph, of
the age of 19, daughter of Isham Randolph, one of the seven sons of
that name and family, settled at Dungeoness in Goochland. They trace
their pedigree far back in England and Scotland, to which let every one
ascribe the faith and merit he chooses.

My father's education had been quite neglected; but being of a strong
mind, sound judgment, and eager after information, he read much
and improved himself, insomuch that he was chosen, with Joshua Fry,
Professor of Mathematics in William and Mary college, to continue
the boundary line between Virginia and North Carolina, which had been
begun by Colonel Byrd; and was afterwards employed with the same Mr.
Fry, to make the first map of Virginia which had ever been made, that
of Captain Smith being merely a conjectural sketch. They possessed
excellent materials for so much of the country as is below the blue
ridge; little being then known beyond that ridge. He was the third
or fourth settler, about the year 1737, of the part of the country in
which I live. He died, August 17th, 1757, leaving my mother a widow,
who lived till 1776, with six daughters and two sons, myself the
elder. To my younger brother he left his estate on James River, called
Snowden, after the supposed birth-place of the family: to myself, the
lands on which I was born and live.

He placed me at the English school at five years of age; and at the
Latin at nine, where I continued until his death. My teacher, Mr.
Douglas, a clergyman from Scotland, with the rudiments of the Latin and
Greek languages, taught me the French; and on the death of my father, I
went to the Reverend Mr. Maury, a correct classical scholar, with whom
I continued two years; and then, to wit, in the spring of 1760, went to
William and Mary college, where I continued two years. It was my great
good fortune, and what probably fixed the destinies of my life, that
Dr. William Small of Scotland, was then professor of Mathematics, a man
profound in most of the useful branches of science, with a happy talent
of communication, correct and gentlemanly manners, and an enlarged and
liberal mind. He, most happily for me, became soon attached to me, and
made me his daily companion when not engaged in the school; and from
his conversation I got my first views of the expansion of science,
and of the system of things in which we are placed. Fortunately, the
philosophical chair became vacant soon after my arrival at college,
and he was appointed to fill it _per interim_: and he was the first
who ever gave, in that college, regular lectures in Ethics, Rhetoric
and Belles lettres. He returned to Europe in 1762, having previously
filled up the measure of his goodness to me, by procuring for me, from
his most intimate friend, George Wythe, a reception as a student of
law, under his direction, and introduced me to the acquaintance and
familiar table of Governor Fauquier, the ablest man who had ever filled
that office. With him, and at his table, Dr. Small and Mr. Wythe, his
_amici omnium horarum_, and myself, formed a _partie quarree_, and to
the habitual conversations on these occasions I owed much instruction.
Mr. Wythe continued to be my faithful and beloved mentor in youth,
and my most affectionate friend through life. In 1767, he led me into
the practice of the law at the bar of the General court, at which I
continued until the Revolution shut up the courts of justice.[1]

In 1769, I became a member of the legislature by the choice of the
county in which I live, and so continued until it was closed by the
Revolution. I made one effort in that body for the permission of the
emancipation of slaves, which was rejected: and indeed, during the
regal government, nothing liberal could expect success. Our minds were
circumscribed within narrow limits, by an habitual belief that it was
our duty to be subordinate to the mother country in all matters of
government, to direct all our labors in subservience to her interests,
and even to observe a bigoted intolerance for all religions but
hers. The difficulties with our representatives were of habit and
despair, not of reflection and conviction. Experience soon proved
that they could bring their minds to rights, on the first summons of
their attention. But the King's Council, which acted as another house
of legislature, held their places at will, and were in most humble
obedience to that will: the Governor too, who had a negative on our
laws, held by the same tenure, and with still greater devotedness to
it: and, last of all, the Royal negative closed the last door to every
hope of amelioration.

On the 1st of January, 1772, I was married to Martha Skelton, widow
of Bathurst Skelton, and daughter of John Wayles, then twenty-three
years old. Mr. Wayles was a lawyer of much practice, to which he was
introduced more by his great industry, punctuality, and practical
readiness, than by eminence in the science of his profession. He was
a most agreeable companion, full of pleasantry and good humor, and
welcomed in every society. He acquired a handsome fortune, and died
in May, 1773, leaving three daughters: the portion which came on
that event to Mrs. Jefferson, after the debts should be paid, which
were very considerable, was about equal to my own patrimony, and
consequently doubled the ease of our circumstances.

When the famous Resolutions of 1765, against the Stamp-act, were
proposed, I was yet a student of law in Williamsburgh. I attended the
debate, however, at the door of the lobby of the House of Burgesses,
and heard the splendid display of Mr. Henry's talents as a popular
orator. They were great indeed; such as I have never heard from any
other man. He appeared to me to speak as Homer wrote. Mr. Johnson, a
lawyer, and member from the Northern Neck, seconded the resolutions,
and by him the learning and the logic of the case were chiefly
maintained. My recollections of these transactions may be seen page 60
of the life of Patrick Henry, by Wirt, to whom I furnished them.

In May, 1769, a meeting of the General Assembly was called by the
Governor, Lord Botetourt. I had then become a member; and to that
meeting became known the joint resolutions and address of the
Lords and Commons, of 1768-9, on the proceedings in Massachusetts.
Counter-resolutions, and an address to the King by the House of
Burgesses, were agreed to with little opposition, and a spirit
manifestly displayed itself of considering the cause of Massachusetts
as a common one. The Governor dissolved us: but we met the next day in
the Apollo[2] of the Raleigh tavern, formed ourselves into a voluntary
convention, drew up articles of association against the use of any
merchandise imported from Great Britain, signed and recommended them
to the people, repaired to our several counties, and were re-elected
without any other exception than of the very few who had declined
assent to our proceedings.

Nothing of particular excitement occurring for a considerable time,
our countrymen seemed to fall into a state of insensibility to our
situation; the duty on tea, not yet repealed, and the declaratory act
of a right in the British Parliament to bind us by their laws in all
cases whatsoever, still suspended over us. But a court of inquiry held
in Rhode Island in 1762, with a power to send persons to England to be
tried for offences committed here, was considered, at our session of
the spring of 1773, as demanding attention. Not thinking our old and
leading members up to the point of forwardness and zeal which the times
required, Mr. Henry, Richard Henry Lee, Francis L. Lee, Mr. Carr and
myself agreed to meet in the evening, in a private room of the Raleigh,
to consult on the state of things. There may have been a member or two
more whom I do not recollect. We were all sensible that the most urgent
of all measures was that of coming to an understanding with all the
other colonies, to consider the British claims as a common cause to
all, and to produce a unity of action: and, for this purpose, that a
committee of correspondence in each colony would be the best instrument
for inter-communication: and that their first measure would probably
be, to propose a meeting of deputies from every colony, at some central
place, who should be charged with the direction of the measures which
should be taken by all. We, therefore, drew up the resolutions which
may be seen in Wirt, page 87. The consulting members proposed to me to
move them, but I urged that it should be done by Mr. Carr, my friend
and brother-in-law, then a new member, to whom I wished an opportunity
should be given of making known to the house his great worth and
talents. It was so agreed; he moved them, they were agreed to _nem.
con._, and a committee of correspondence appointed, of whom Peyton
Randolph, the speaker, was chairman. The Governor (then Lord Dunmore)
dissolved us, but the committee met the next day, prepared a circular
letter to the speakers of the other colonies, inclosing to each a
copy of the resolutions, and left it in charge with their chairman to
forward them by expresses.

The origination of these committees of correspondence between the
colonies has been since claimed for Massachusetts, and Marshall[3] has
given into this error, although the very note of his appendix to which
he refers, shows that their establishment was confined to their own
towns. This matter will be seen clearly stated in a letter of Samuel
Adams Wells to me of April 2nd, 1819, and my answer of May 12th. I
was corrected by the letter of Mr. Wells in the information I had
given Mr. Wirt, as stated in his note, page 87, that the messengers
of Massachusetts and Virginia crossed each other on the way, bearing
similar propositions; for Mr. Wells shows that Massachusetts did not
adopt the measure, but on the receipt of our proposition, delivered at
their next session. Their message, therefore, which passed ours, must
have related to something else, for I well remember Peyton Randolph's
informing me of the crossing of our messengers.[4]

The next event which excited our sympathies for Massachusetts, was
the Boston port bill, by which that port was to be shut up on the 1st
of June, 1774. This arrived while we were in session in the spring
of that year. The lead in the House, on these subjects, being no
longer left to the old members, Mr. Henry, R. H. Lee, Fr. L. Lee,
three or four other members, whom I do not recollect, and myself,
agreeing that we must boldly take an unequivocal stand in the line with
Massachusetts, determined to meet and consult on the proper measures,
in the council-chamber, for the benefit of the library in that room.
We were under conviction of the necessity of arousing our people from
the lethargy into which they had fallen, as to passing events; and
thought that the appointment of a day of general fasting and prayer
would be most likely to call up and alarm their attention. No example
of such a solemnity had existed since the days of our distresses in the
war of '55, since which a new generation had grown up. With the help,
therefore, of Rushworth, whom we rummaged over for the revolutionary
precedents and forms of the Puritans of that day, preserved by him,
we cooked up a resolution, somewhat modernizing their phrases, for
appointing the 1st day of June, on which the port-bill was to commence,
for a day of fasting, humiliation, and prayer, to implore Heaven to
avert from us the evils of civil war, to inspire us with firmness
in support of our rights, and to turn the hearts of the King and
Parliament to moderation and justice. To give greater emphasis to our
proposition, we agreed to wait the next morning on Mr. Nicholas, whose
grave and religious character was more in unison with the tone of our
resolution, and to solicit him to move it. We accordingly went to him
in the morning. He moved it the same day; the 1st of June was proposed;
and it passed without opposition. The Governor dissolved us, as
usual. We retired to the Apollo, as before, agreed to an association,
and instructed the committee of correspondence to propose to the
corresponding committees of the other colonies, to appoint deputies to
meet in Congress at such place, _annually_, as should be convenient,
to direct, from time to time, the measures required by the general
interest: and we declared that an attack on any one colony, should
be considered as an attack on the whole. This was in May. We further
recommended to the several counties to elect deputies to meet at
Williamsburgh, the 1st of August ensuing, to consider the state of the
colony, and particularly to appoint delegates to a general Congress,
should that measure be acceded to by the committees of correspondence
generally. It was acceded to; Philadelphia was appointed for the place,
and the 5th of September for the time of meeting. We returned home, and
in our several counties invited the clergy to meet assemblies of the
people on the 1st of June, to perform the ceremonies of the day, and
to address to them discourses suited to the occasion. The people met
generally, with anxiety and alarm in their countenances, and the effect
of the day, through the whole colony, was like a shock of electricity,
arousing every man, and placing him erect and solidly on his centre.
They chose, universally, delegates for the convention. Being elected
one for my own county, I prepared a draught of instructions to be given
to the delegates whom we should send to the Congress, which I meant
to propose at our meeting.[5] In this I took the ground that, from
the beginning, I had thought the only one orthodox or tenable, which
was, that the relation between Great Britain and these colonies was
exactly the same as that of England and Scotland, after the accession
of James, and until the union, and the same as her present relations
with Hanover, having the same executive chief, but no other necessary
political connection; and that our emigration from England to this
country gave her no more rights over us, than the emigrations of the
Danes and Saxons gave to the present authorities of the mother country,
over England. In this doctrine, however, I had never been able to get
any one to agree with me but Mr. Wythe. He concurred in it from the
first dawn of the question, What was the political relation between
us and England? Our other patriots, Randolph, the Lees, Nicholas,
Pendleton, stopped at the half-way house of John Dickinson, who
admitted that England had a right to regulate our commerce, and to
lay duties on it for the purposes of regulation, but not of raising
revenue. But for this ground there was no foundation in compact, in any
acknowledged principles of colonization, nor in reason: expatriation
being a natural right, and acted on as such, by all nations, in all
ages. I set out for Williamsburg some days before that appointed for
our meeting, but was taken ill of a dysentery on the road, and was
unable to proceed. I sent on, therefore, to Williamsburgh, two copies
of my draught, the one under cover to Peyton Randolph, who I knew would
be in the chair of the convention, the other to Patrick Henry. Whether
Mr. Henry disapproved the ground taken, or was too lazy to read it (for
he was the laziest man in reading I ever knew) I never learned: but
he communicated it to nobody. Peyton Randolph informed the convention
he had received such a paper from a member, prevented by sickness from
offering it in his place, and he laid it on the table for perusal. It
was read generally by the members, approved by many, though thought too
bold for the present state of things; but they printed it in pamphlet
form, under the title of "A Summary View of the Rights of British
America." It found its way to England, was taken up by the opposition,
interpolated a little by Mr. Burke so as to make it answer opposition
purposes, and in that form ran rapidly through several editions. This
information I had from Parson Hurt, who happened at the time to be
in London, whither he had gone to receive clerical orders; and I was
informed afterwards by Peyton Randolph, that it had procured me the
honor of having my name inserted in a long list of proscriptions,
enrolled in a bill of attainder commenced in one of the Houses of
Parliament, but suppressed in embryo by the hasty step of events, which
warned them to be a little cautious. Montague, agent of the House of
Burgesses in England, made extracts from the bill, copied the names,
and sent them to Peyton Randolph. The names, I think, were about
twenty, which he repeated to me, but I recollect those only of Hancock,
the two Adamses, Peyton Randolph himself, Patrick Henry, and myself.[6]
The convention met on the 1st of August, renewed their association,
appointed delegates to the Congress, gave them instructions very
temperately and properly expressed, both as to style and matter;[7]
and they repaired to Philadelphia at the time appointed. The splendid
proceedings of that Congress, at their first session, belong to general
history, are known to every one, and need not therefore be noted here.
They terminated their session on the 26th of October, to meet again
on the 10th of May ensuing. The convention, at their ensuing session
of March, '75, approved of the proceedings of Congress, thanked their
delegates, and reappointed the same persons to represent the colony
at the meeting to be held in May: and foreseeing the probability that
Peyton Randolph, their president, and speaker also of the House of
Burgesses, might be called off, they added me, in that event, to the
delegation.

Mr. Randolph was, according to expectation, obliged to leave the chair
of Congress, to attend the General Assembly summoned by Lord Dunmore,
to meet on the 1st day of June, 1775. Lord North's conciliatory
propositions, as they were called, had been received by the Governor,
and furnished the subject for which this assembly was convened. Mr.
Randolph accordingly attended, and the tenor of these propositions
being generally known, as having been addressed to all the governors,
he was anxious that the answer of our Assembly, likely to be the first,
should harmonize with what he knew to be the sentiments and wishes of
the body he had recently left. He feared that Mr. Nicholas, whose mind
was not yet up to the mark of the times, would undertake the answer,
and therefore pressed me to prepare it. I did so, and, with his aid,
carried it through the House, with long and doubtful scruples from
Mr. Nicholas and James Mercer, and a dash of cold water on it here
and there, enfeebling it somewhat, but finally with unanimity, or
a vote approaching it. This being passed, I repaired immediately to
Philadelphia, and conveyed to Congress the first notice they had of
it. It was entirely approved there. I took my seat with them on the
21st of June. On the 24th, a committee which had been appointed to
prepare a declaration of the causes of taking up arms, brought in their
report (drawn I believe by J. Rutledge) which, not being liked, the
House recommitted it, on the 26th, and added Mr. Dickinson and myself
to the committee. On the rising of the House, the committee having not
yet met, I happened to find myself near Governor W. Livingston, and
proposed to him to draw the paper. He excused himself and proposed
that I should draw it. On my pressing him with urgency, "we are as
yet but new acquaintances, sir," said he, "why are you so earnest for
my doing it?" "Because," said I, "I have been informed that you drew
the Address to the people of Great Britain, a production, certainly,
of the finest pen in America." "On that," says he, "perhaps, sir, you
may not have been correctly informed." I had received the information
in Virginia from Colonel Harrison on his return from that Congress.
Lee, Livingston, and Jay had been the committee for that draught.
The first, prepared by Lee, had been disapproved and recommitted. The
second was drawn by Jay, but being presented by Governor Livingston,
had led Colonel Harrison into the error. The next morning, walking in
the hall of Congress, many members being assembled, but the House not
yet formed, I observed Mr. Jay speaking to R. H. Lee, and leading him
by the button of his coat to me. "I understand, sir," said he to me,
"that this gentleman informed you, that Governor Livingston drew the
Address to the people of Great Britain." I assured him, at once, that
I had not received that information from Mr. Lee, and that not a word
had ever passed on the subject between Mr. Lee and myself; and after
some explanations the subject was dropped. These gentlemen had had some
sparrings in debate before, and continued ever very hostile to each
other.

I prepared a draught of the declaration committed to us. It was too
strong for Mr. Dickinson. He still retained the hope of reconciliation
with the mother country, and was unwilling it should be lessened by
offensive statements. He was so honest a man, and so able a one, that
he was greatly indulged even by those who could not feel his scruples.
We therefore requested him to take the paper, and put it into a form
he could approve. He did so, preparing an entire new statement, and
preserving of the former only the last four paragraphs and half of
the preceding one. We approved and reported it to Congress, who
accepted it. Congress gave a signal proof of their indulgence to
Mr. Dickinson, and of their great desire not to go too fast for any
respectable part of our body, in permitting him to draw their second
petition to the King according to his own ideas, and passing it with
scarcely any amendment. The disgust against this humility was general;
and Mr. Dickinson's delight at its passage was the only circumstance
which reconciled them to it. The vote being passed, although further
observation on it was out of order, he could not refrain from rising
and expressing his satisfaction, and concluded by saying, "there is but
one word, Mr. President, in the paper which I disapprove, and that is
the word _Congress;_" on which Ben Harrison rose and said, "There is
but one word in the paper, Mr. President, of which I approve, and that
is the word _Congress_."
